one of the major benefits of setting up a shade with a procedural workflow.
Is that through its several parameters,
A procedural shader is not only highly adjustable but also very nicely animated.
All you can simply just like any other parameter and blender
animate your shader parameters by setting key frames
and editing f curves in the graph editor
that can be used for example to set up your characters with dynamic
shakers that can be animated just like the bones of an armature.
But what I want to talk about in this
video specifically is using the procedural methods that I've shown
you in this course to even create procedural animations without
touching key frames and the graph editor at all.
This workflow is definitely not always the best way to do it
but for very general animation of for example periodic effects
or variation on top of the manual animation over time
it is usually much more convenient and flexible to set the animation up that way,
the easiest way to integrate a time parameter in the shader
no tree is to create a driver that references the current frame
as I've shown in the previous video,
you can simply type hash frame into the value
field to directly linked to the current frame.
That works in almost every value field and blender.
And it's a super quick way to animate
any parameter without having to create multiple key
frames in the same way by including the
current frame variable in a script driver expression.
You can create all sorts of dependencies on the time.
This works essentially by defining the expression of the value that
you want to drive as a function over the time.
The input of that function is simply the current frame and the output.
The animation parameter.
Working with procedural animation in the Shader editor,
you even have the benefit of not having to define
everything from within the driver expression of the value input.
You can also simply have the frame parameter as an input value.
Note in the no tree and use the math note operations to adjust the animation.
That way you can even expose parameters
that define the properties of the animation,
like the animation speed,
as separate inputs and even as inputs of a note group for example,
I mentioned previously in the chapter of a space manipulation
that we would do some time manipulation as well.
And this is the moment I was referring to.
Just in the same way that you can remap warp and fold coordinate vectors.
You can also manipulate how the time input animates the parameters.
Most of the concepts of how we have been manipulating space in the
previous chapters can be applied in the same way for manipulating time.
The biggest difference is that the time parameter
is usually the same over the whole map.
It only has a single component instead of three,
which means that it is much simpler to control
even though it might take some more getting used to
in this sense that is maybe more accurate to compare the time manipulation to
the parameter calibration that he was also
talking about in the previous chapter you
can just think about the input parameter being the time as the current frame
and the calibration defining how the animated
functionality behaves depending on the time.
The calibration essentially defines what it means to be at frame zero and
for example frame 100 and how it transitions between the different operations that
define the manipulation of the time Parameters are the same as what we
previously established for the other use
cases addition and subtraction define an offset
just that this officer, it is now in time
and not along an axis in space,
multiplication or division define a squash or stretch,
but for the time parameter
this means a change in speed and northern texture scale and
apart from those of course you can adjust the time parameter
to follow a non linear interpolation which results in a changing
speed over time here for example using exponential functions is great.
Again
either to make the parameter accelerate faster and faster
or to define a saturation that approaches a maximum more and more slowly.
Another very useful way of using the time
parameter is to create some type of periodic animation
to achieve that you can use for example the sign or co sign operation.
Those return a value that is smoothly oscillates between -1 and positive one.
The range of this oscillation.
You can of course adjust to the range that you need by using a map range. Note
Also you have to keep in mind that the period for when
a full oscillation of the sign or coastline repeats is two pi.
So if you simply use the frame variable as the argument
of the function then it oscillates every three point something frames
and usually that is not what you want.
So you'll also have to calibrate the input to the required range.
The best way to do so is to divide the frame parameter by the desired period
length and then multiplying it by two times
pi before plugging it into the sign operation.
And as you can see now the oscillation repeats exactly after
the amount of frames that is set as an additional parameter.
If you want a simple linear repetition,
you can as usual also use the fraction or ping pong operation.
Just like we have seen for the manipulation of other parameters.
You can use the different operations linked together as
modules to combine the individual operations of offsetting,
squashing etcetera,
creating just the right transformation for the time parameter that you need
that way you can build together
a custom and interesting looking procedural animation
but just as important as knowing how to set up a procedural animation with a
time parameter is knowing what to control the
shading setup to achieve the desired effect.
You can use the time parameters.
Who animate anything in the shader that accepts a value input
and you can go completely crazy with that.
But I do want to go over a couple of the more usual shaded properties to animate
and the techniques to do so.
Some of the most basic ways of introducing animation into
a shader is animating the fundamental transformations of translation,
rotation or scale that works just the same as you would expect.
You can simply use the actual operation responsible for the
transformation you need in combination with an animated input.
So for example, you can simply animate the offset vector in a vector ad note
to gradually shift the texture along an axis.
I'll just use a vector scale operation to define
the direction and scale it with the time parameter.
A simple offset and combination with a custom coordinate system
can even translate into all kinds of other effects.
For example, when I set up a rotational repetition with polar coordinates,
as I've shown you way back in the chapter about shape creation,
adding the time parameter as a shift value on top of the angular
component creates a nice rotation without having
to rotate the whole coordinate system.
What this is is basically just offsetting the angle.
Another basic idea of animating a shader that is based on a noise is simply
increasing the dimension of that noise and
then animating that additional unused dimension parameter.
That is very useful to create a nice and smooth variation over time
that truly changes how the noise looks opposed to simply warping a drowned
but warping it around
is another method of animating a texture in a subtle way.
If you remember something that I've shown multiple times throughout the course is
to create some variation in a texture by distorting the coordinate space.
I've usually done this by using a noise texture and
a mixed Rgb notes set to a linear light.
This distortion, for example, can also be animated.
This seemingly turns any texture into a slightly moving liquid.
You can also use a noise driven by the time parameter directly
instead of using periodic behavior
that gives you essentially a parameter that is noisy over time.
The way to do this is to simply use a one
dimensional noise texture and instead of mapping it onto a spaceship,
coordinate using the time parameter directly as the w input.
The resulting value and color can then be used as
a parameter that randomly but smoothly oscillates around 0.5.
The scale of the noise controls the overall frequency
and the detail the level of flickering on top.
Something I want to add in general about
the application of procedural animation is that the
perceived speed of something is not only dependent
on how quickly the time parameter changes,
but also on how much distance or change
the resulting map undergoes in a specific time.
This way stretching an animated texture can have just as much an effect on how
fast the movement is in certain places as
changing the time parameter at different rates.
This is in the fact that you have to keep in mind is it can be used as a trick,
but it might also be something that you want to avoid.